NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO INSTITUTIONS CAUSE GROWTH?
Edward L. Glaeser
Rafael La Porta
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 10568
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10568
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We thank Philippe Aghion, Olivier Blanchard, Oded Galor, Simon Johnson, Aart Kraay, Ross Levine,
Torsten Persson, Dani Rodrik and an anonymous referee for helpful comments, and Sebastian Brown for
research assistance.  The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.  All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Institutions Cause Growth?
Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10568
June 2004
JEL No. O11, O40
ABSTRACT
We revisit the debate over whether political institutions cause economic growth, or whether,
alternatively, growth and human capital accumulation lead to institutional improvement. We find
that most indicators of institutional quality used to establish the proposition that institutions cause
growth are constructed to be conceptually unsuitable for that purpose. We also find that some of the
instrumental variable techniques used in the literature are flawed. Basic OLS results, as well as a
variety of additional evidence, suggest that a) human capital is a more basic source of growth than
are the institutions, b) poor countries get out of poverty through good policies, often pursued by
dictators, and c) subsequently improve their political institutions.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
315A Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Rafael La Porta
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
314 Woodbury 
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06517
and NBER
florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

2
I. Introduction. 
  
 
Today, both the U.S. and the international community face two major development 
challenges around the world, from Iraq, to Haiti, to sub-Saharan Africa: how to ignite growth and 
how to establish democracy.   Economic research has identified two broad approaches to 
confronting these challenges.   The first approach emphasizes the need to start with democracy 
and other checks on government as the mechanisms for securing property rights.   With such 
political institutions in place, investment in human and physical capital, and therefore economic 
growth, are expected to follow.   The second approach emphasizes the need for human and 
physical capital accumulation to start the process.  It holds that even pro-market dictators can 
secure property rights as a matter of policy choice, not of political constraints.   From the vantage 
point of poor countries, it sees democracy and other institutional improvements as the 
consequences of increased education and wealth, not as their causes.   
 
Both approaches to development have extensive intellectual pedigree.  The importance of 
constraining government was stressed by Montesquieu (1748) and Smith (1776), as well by the 
new institutional economics literature (Buchanan and Tullock 1962, North and Thomas 1973, 
North 1981, 1990).   DeLong and Shleifer (1993) supplied early empirical support for this view 
using data on urbanization of European regions during the last millennium, which showed faster 
city growth under more limited governments.   More recently, the literature on economic growth, 
starting with early contributions by Knack and Keefer (1995) and Mauro (1995), has turned to the 
effects of good institutions on economic growth.   It is fair to say that recent work, including Hall 
and Jones (1999), Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002), Easterly and Levine (2003), 
Dollar and Kraay (2003), and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002), has reached close to an 
intellectual consensus that the political institutions of limited government cause economic growth.